 Best Practices :

 Automate job definition

 

Jenkins has the ability to automatically create, update, and delete jobs based on the repositories it identifies in your software configuration management system. Leverage this feature and optimize your job management by structuring your job definitions in a way that maximizes the benefits offered by Jenkins' automatic job management capabilities.

There are multiple alternatives for automatic job management, including:

    Use organization folders - create, update, and delete multibranch Pipeline folders and Pipeline jobs automatically (preferred)

    Use multibranch Pipelines - create, update and deleted Pipeline jobs automatically

    Use Pipeline - Manually defined Pipeline jobs for more control over the job management process.


Use organization folders

Organization Folders provide a convenient way to automate the creation and deletion of jobs in Jenkins as repositories and branches are added or removed. If you are using GitHub organizations, Bitbucket teams, GitLab groups, or Gitea organizations, Jenkins can automatically detect the creation of a new repository and generate a Multibranch Pipeline project for it.

Use multibranch Pipelines

If you are unable to use organization folders, you can opt for multibranch Pipelines as an alternative. However, it’s important to note that organization folders are preferred over multibranch Pipelines because they provide the automation of creating and deleting multibranch projects when repositories are added or removed.

Use Pipeline

If organization folders are not an option for you, consider using multibranch Pipelines as an alternative. However, it’s important to highlight that organization folders are preferred, due to their ability to automatically create and delete multibranch projects when repositories are added or removed.



Report build results

Charts and graphs provide valuable insights into project status and progress, showcasing trends and patterns. Automated test results including unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-end tests can reveal brittleness or instability. Coverage reports help identify areas where automated tests are not being executed. Compiler warning messages often serve as the first indication of a problem. Static analysis tools are effective in reporting risky code or code with potential security risks. Performance test results help identify delays or areas of concern.

The Warnings Next Generation plugin provides convenient access to many reports including:

    Compiler warnnings and errors (like gcc, clang, javac, or golang)

    Static analysis warnings and errors (spotbugs, checkstyle, pmd, lint, cpd, or Simian)

    Code coverage reports

Build on agents

Use agents to perform builds instead of running builds on the controller. Utilizing agents offers enhanced safety and scalability.


Show failures to the right people

Configure notifications for failing and unstable jobs, to ensure that the right people receive them without causing unnecessary distractions for others. Many Jenkins users prefer to be notified only when a failure is likely their responsibility. This approach acknowledges that if they are not responsible for the failure, they may not be the most suitable person to investigate it.

Refine your notification system to prioritize notifying the most recent committers when new test failures occur, as they are likely to be the cause of the issue.

Use simple project names

Jenkins utilizes project names for organizing related folders. However, it’s important to note that certain tools may encounter issues with spaces, dollar signs, or similar characters in file paths. To ensure compatibility, it’s recommended to limit project names to alphanumeric characters` [a-zA-Z0-9_-]+`. To enhance the appearance of project names, you can utilize the Display Name feature. This allows you to customize the presentation, while maintaining the restricted characters in the underlying project name. To enforce consistent naming conventions across all projects, enable the "Restrict project naming" setting in the system configuration. This ensures that naming restrictions are enforced uniformly.
Fingerprint your dependencies

When dealing with interdependent projects, it can be challenging to keep track of which version of one project is used by another. However, Jenkins offers a solution called "file fingerprinting" to simplify this process.

Don’t use the Maven job type

Jenkins has been providing the Maven integration plugin for many years, allowing users to create Maven projects using the "Maven project" selection from the Jenkins "New item" menu. While the Maven job type offers a higher level of integration with Maven builds, it can sometimes introduce unnecessary complexities due to this deep integration.

Consider using organization folders, multibranch Pipelines, or Pipeline jobs instead of the Maven job type. These alternatives provide more flexibility and simplicity in managing your Jenkins jobs and workflows.

The Jenkins project uses organization folders to build Jenkins core and Jenkins plugins on ci.jenkins.io. A Jenkins Pipeline builds Maven projects easily and provides much better control for Maven users.



Manage your controller

The Jenkins controller plays a crucial role as a central resource, requiring effective management for optimal performance. By following these practices, you can ensure that your controller provides the best possible experience for users.
Secure the controller

Jenkins installations come with security enabled by default, which is a crucial aspect of protecting your system. While it is technically possible to disable security, it is strongly advised not to do so. Disabling security can leave your Jenkins instance vulnerable to unauthorized access and potential security breaches. It is important to maintain a secure environment by keeping security enabled at all times.


Back up regularly

Even the most reliable systems can experience failures. That’s why it’s crucial to be prepared and regularly check the health of your backups. Backups are a critical component of ensuring the integrity and availability of your data. Regularly testing your backups and verifying their completeness and restorability will help you mitigate the impact of any potential failures and ensure that your data can be recovered effectively when needed. Prioritizing backup health and conducting routine checks is essential for maintaining a robust and resilient system.

Avoid scheduling overload

Schedule your jobs strategically to balance the number of jobs running concurrently. I




By implementing these scheduling techniques, you can optimize the utilization of your resources and ensure a smoother execution of your jobs.
Avoid resource collisions

When multiple jobs run simultaneously, there is a possibility of collisions occurring, especially if they require exclusive access to certain resources or set-up services. To prevent interference and ensure smooth execution, it is important to manage resource access effectively. For builds involving databases or networked services, it is crucial to implement measures that prevent conflicts. The Lockable Resources plugin offers fine-grained resource-locking capabilities for Jenkins jobs. By using this plugin, you can ensure that only one job has access to a specific resource at a time, avoiding conflicts and ensuring proper synchronization. In cases where resource locking with the lockable resources plugin is not sufficient, you can further control concurrent builds using the Throttle Concurrent Builds plugin. This plugin allows you to limit the number of builds that can run simultaneously, providing additional control and preventing overload on shared resources.


-------

 Working with projects 

 

Jenkins uses projects (also known as "jobs") to perform its work. Projects are defined and run by Jenkins users. Jenkins offers several different types of projects, including:

    Pipeline

    Multibranch Pipeline

    Organization folders

    Freestyle

    Multi-configuration (matrix)

    Maven

    External job

Copying projects

Copy an existing project by clicking the "New Item" link on the side panel. 

Renaming projects

Rename an existing project by clicking the "Rename" action on the project page. When a job is renamed, other jobs that refer to the job by name must be updated to match the new name.


Moving projects

Move an existing project to another folder by clicking the "Move" action on the project page. When a job is moved, other jobs that refer to the job by name must be updated to match the new name.

-------------

 Using credentials 

 

Credentials stored in Jenkins can be used:

    anywhere applicable throughout Jenkins (i.e. global credentials),

    by a specific Pipeline project/item (read more about this in the Handling credentials section of Using a Jenkinsfile),

    by a specific Jenkins user (as is the case for Pipeline projects created in Blue Ocean).

Jenkins can store the following types of credentials:

    Secret text - a token such as an API token (e.g. a GitHub personal access token),

    Username and password - which could be handled as separate components or as a colon separated string in the format username:password (read more about this in Handling credentials),

    Secret file - which is essentially secret content in a file,

    SSH Username with private key - an SSH public/private key pair,

    Certificate - a PKCS#12 certificate file and optional password, or

    Docker Host Certificate Authentication credentials.


Credential security
encrypted and can be only handeled  in Pipeline projects via their credential IDs.
jenkins hinders the ability to copy functional credentials from one Jenkins instance to another.



Configuring credentials


Credentials can be added to Jenkins by any Jenkins user who has the Credentials > Create permission (set through Matrix-based security). These permissions can be configured by a Jenkins user with the Administer permission. Read more about this in the Authorization section of Managing Security.




-------
 Search Box 



 -----
 Referencing another project by name 

 

In many places throughout Jenkins, you can refer to another project/job by name. For example, in a Pipeline Script, you might want to copy artifacts from another project:

copyArtifacts projectName: 'myproject'


Differentiating between multiple projects with the same name using absolute or relative path.


Name encoding

Special characters in paths should be URL-encoded. For example, if your Multibranch Pipeline has a branch with a slash in it (feature/myfeature), replace the slash with %2F:

mymultibranchproject/feature%2Fmyfeature



-------
  Aborting a build 




When you click that [x] icon from the UI, the following things happen:

    Browser sends a request to the server.

    The server interrupts (via Thread.interrupt()) the thread (AKA executor thread) that is responsible for carrying out a build.

    The server returns

At this point, your browser is back, but the actual abort process happens from here asynchronously.

    The thread gets the interrupt signal. How quickly this happens depends on what the executor is doing at the time of the interruption. Specifically, an executor thread can only be interrupted in "interruption points" due to the Java design.

        Waiting for a completion of a child process (for example, maybe the build is running Ant) is an interruption point. That means if the executor was doing that, it gets interrupted instantaneously.

        Waiting for a computation on an agent is an interruption point.

        Waiting for file or network I/O is not an interruption point. This often causes the problem where a build appears to be un-abortable. For example, checking out a Subversion repository falls in this category.

        Normal computation is also not an interruption point.

    The executor performs a clean up operation. This depends on what it was doing by the time it noticed the interruption.

        If it was waiting for a completion of a child process, Jenkins will search for all the descendant processes and kill them all. On Unix, this is done through java.lang.UnixProcess.destroyProcess, which sends SIGTERM on Unix-based JDK implementations. On Windows, this is done through TerminateProcess API.

        If it was waiting for a completion of some computation in an agent, the thread that’s performing the remote computation is interrupted asynchronously. How quickly that threads gets interrupted depends on what that thread is doing. See above.

    Executor starts unwinding the stack, and eventually it finishes the unwinding. At this point, the build is marked as aborted and executor returns to the idle status.

Pipeline jobs can be stopped by sending an HTTP POST request to URL endpoints of a build.

    BUILD ID URL/stop - aborts a Pipeline.

    BUILD ID URL/term - forcibly terminates a build (should only be used if stop does not work).

    BUILD ID URL/kill - hard kill a pipeline. This is the most destructive way to stop a pipeline and should only be used as a last resort.

If your build isn’t aborting

Check the thread dump http://yourserver/jenkins/threadDump and look for the executor thread in question — they are named after the agent and executor number. That’ll normally tell you where the thread is, and often reveals why it’s not responding to an interruption.


-------
 Fingerprints
Tracking file usage across Jenkins jobs using fingerprints

When you have interdependent projects on Jenkins, it often becomes hard to keep track of which version of a file is used by which version of a dependency on that file. Jenkins supports file fingerprinting to track dependencies.

For example, suppose you have a TOP project that depends on a MIDDLE project, which in turn depends on a BOTTOM project. You are working on the BOTTOM project. The TOP team reported that the bottom.jar that they are using causes an NPE, which you (a member of the BOTTOM team) thought you fixed in BOTTOM #32. Jenkins can tell you which MIDDLE builds and TOP builds are using (or not using) your bottom.jar #32.





steps  :


Click on the button to add a Post-build action.

Select Record fingerprints of files to track usage.


Maven job type does this automatically for its dependencies and artifacts.



How does it work?

The fingerprint of a file is simply an MD5 checksum. Jenkins maintains a database of MD5 checksums, and for each MD5 checksum, Jenkins records which builds of which projects used it. This database is updated every time a build runs and files are fingerprinted.

To avoid excessive disk usage, Jenkins does not store the actual file. Instead, it just stores MD5 checksums and their usages. These files can be seen in

$JENKINS_HOME/fingerprints

Plugins can store additional information in these records. For example, Deployment Notification Plugin tracks files deployed on servers via chef/puppet through fingerprints.


=========
 Using local language 
 

You can additionally change the system language (used when builds are executing), as well as the user interface language for all users by using the Locale Plugin.

-------
 Change time zone 

 

To see the time zone currently set, go to jenkins_server/systemInfo and see the user.timezone system property.




=======

 Remote Access API 

 IMP IMP IMP Read full page : https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/using/remote-access-api/


 ------

  Executor Starvation 




The tool tip of the job name link next to the clock icon should tell you exactly why it is not building, but the common symptoms are as follows:

    Agents are offline: your build needs to run on a particular agent, but the agent is offline. Go to http://server/jenkins/computer/AGENTNAME to understand why, and bring it back online. Or better yet, use labels and do not tie builds to specific agents, so that a single offline agents will not prevent your builds from starving.

    Waiting for an available executor on an agent: your build needs to run on a particular agent, but the agent is already fully busy building other things, and your build is waiting for "too long" compared to the time it takes to execute it — in other words, it does not make sense to wait for 5 minutes when the build itself finishes in 2 minutes. Use labels so that builds can run on any machine that satisfies the system requirements, and in this way you can add more agents to improve the turn-around time.

    Waiting for an available executor on a label: all the agents that have the given label are fully busy doing other things. It is time to add more agents.



-----
 Using Jenkins agents 

 IMP IMP IMP READ FULL PAGE  :  https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/using/using-agents/


 =======
  Using JMeter with Jenkins 
   IMP IMP IMP READ FULL PAGE  : https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/using/using-jmeter-with-jenkins/

-------
 Pluggable Storage 

 
Artifact Storage , Build Log Storage , Configuration Storage, Credentials, Test results, Fingerprint --> can be stored in cloud we just need to setup using APi or using extensions available.


  

 
 











